Advocacy groups acting on behalf of children frequently argue that children’s views need to be taken more seriously. Their assertions to listen more carefully to children’s voices or to expand children’s participation rights, for which they refer to article 12 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), are mostly expressed in relation to social domains that have a positive connotation, such as school life, local policy making or the right to be heard in court proceedings. We need to recognize and enhance children’s constructive roles in society, consider them as social actors and acknowledge their citizenship more fully, the main argument goes, in particular when children ‘do the right thing’. The imposition of high minimum ages, for instance, for exercising the right to vote, to have legal standing or make decisions about one’s schooling are considered a hindrance for recognizing children’s fundamental human rights. The reasoning can be summarized as ‘the lower the age limit to act or to exercise a right, the better’. Conversely, in relation to social domains that have a negative connotation, prevalent children’s rights norms, practices and discourses tend to take the opposite viewpoint. When children marry, work, engage in armed conflict or commit a criminal offence, dominant claims no longer emphasize children’s capacities or participation but prioritize the protection of vulnerable children. When children don’t ‘do the right thing’, the governing principle seems to turn into ‘the higher the age limit, the better’.

Discussions on children’s capacity to participate or to make autonomous choices are closely related to the notion of children’s agency, a key concept in childhood studies. In advocacy discourse, children’s agency refers to their capacity or incapacity of making autonomous choices. Whether or not children are considered having agency is evaluated from a normative standpoint about what is ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ for children to do or not to do, rather than from empirical investigations about children’s actual degrees of capacity or autonomy in practice.

An example of a field where ‘the higher, the better’ principle prevails and that largely prefers protection over agency is the marriage of children and young people. The Committee for the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) stated in a general comment adopted in 1994 that the minimum age for marriage should be 18 years, both for men and women. In adopting this position, CEDAW makes reference to the important responsibilities married persons assume and to the potential negative consequences for the health, education and future economic autonomy of children, in particular girls, who marry at a young age. CEDAW (1994) consequently concluded that ‘marriage should not be permitted before [man and women] have attained full maturity and capacity to act’ (para. 36). The position that 18 years should be the minimum age for marriage has been slightly adapted in a joint recommendation adopted by CEDAW and by the Committee for the Rights of the Child in 2014. The Committees find that the marriage of a ‘mature, capable child’ of at least 16 years can exceptionally be allowed in order to respect ‘the child’s evolving capacities and autonomy in making decisions that affect her or his life’ (Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women/Committee on the Rights of the Child, 2014: para. 20). The marriage of girls has been analysed by Sally Engle Merry (2009) as an example where the culture of agency in human rights discourse poses specific challenges, especially in relation to women. According to Merry, human rights discourse relies on a particular understanding of agency. On one hand, it seeks to promote agency as the making of free and autonomous choice, but on the other hand it also establishes borders beyond which the making of such choice is deemed impossible. The marriage of girls who are under 18 is one of the situations outside the boundaries of a person’s agency: as illustrated by the United Nations (UN) bodies’ joint position on marriage, immaturity and incapacity are thought to prevent a child under a certain age from making a free choice in relation to his or her marriage. Even if more and more people have their right to marry recognized as a fundamental human right based on their free and autonomous choice, such as the claims to legally recognize same-sex marriages, children under a certain age are excluded from such a right. Child marriage, a term which is often used interchangeably with forced marriage, is conceived of solely as a violation of children’s fundamental human rights, notwithstanding children’s own behaviour or opinions on the matter.

Two other examples where children’s rights advocacy discourse prefers protection above agency are related to child labour and to children’s engagement in armed conflict. Dominant viewpoints on child labour, which are also expressed in international legal and policy documents, prescribe that work, a fundamental human right for adults, is an unacceptable activity for persons who are ‘too young’. International law sets the general minimum age for admission to employment at 15 and also prohibits ‘hazardous’ work, which is framed as one of the ‘worst forms’ of child labour, for persons younger than 18. Such an approach hardly leaves space for recognizing working children’s agency; according to the main human and children’s rights discourse, children below the age limits cannot decide for themselves whether or not they want to work for a wage, let alone choose the kind of job they want to perform. On children’s engagement in armed conflict, article 38 of the CRC sets 15 years as the minimum age for children’s direct participation in hostilities and their recruitment in the armed forces. Numerous non-governmental organizations (NGOs), UN entities and States Parties were disappointed with the adoption of this provision because they found this minimum age limit too low and had started immediately after the adoption of the CRC in 1989 an intensive advocacy campaign to correct what was in their opinion a blunt mistake. Their endeavours were successful and eventually led to the adoption (in 2000) of the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which raised the minimum age to 18 years for children’s participation in hostilities and their recruitment in the armed forces. According to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the body that monitors compliance of States with the CRC, the question whether children younger than 15 or 18 years may decide to join armed forces, and hence exercise agency, cannot be defined as voluntary because such choices are typically made under one or the other form of manipulation, out of necessity or because of absence of alternative choices (Cedrangolo, 2009). Even if there is evidence of the contrary, also broader humanitarian narratives on children and armed conflict, of which these regulations are the outcome, solely refer to children as helpless persons who can only be ‘forced’ into joining armed forces or groups (Rosen, 2007).

Questions about children’s agency also arise in advocacy discourse on children’s criminal responsibility, where the ‘the higher, the better’ assumption equally prevails. Here, agency is not so much about exercising a free autonomous choice, but refers to a person’s capacity to respond to his or her wrongdoings. In a policy paper on minimum ages of criminal responsibility, Child Rights International Network (CRIN) (2013), the global children’s rights advocacy network, criticizes the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s position on minimum ages of criminal responsibility for setting a too low age limit. In 2007, the CRC adopted a General Comment on children’s rights in juvenile justice which considers a minimum age of criminal responsibility below the age of 12 years unacceptable and encourages States parties to increase it to a higher age level. The CRIN report finds this age limit too low, because it risks sending children of a young age onwards to what it calls a stigmatizing criminal law system primarily focused on punishment and retribution. As an alternative, the report proposes that States establish 18 as minimum age for criminalization so that people younger than 18 who commit an offence cannot be held responsible in a criminal law procedure. In the debate on children’s criminal responsibility, most children’s rights organizations and commentators are worried that a low minimum age of criminal responsibility will allow States to punish children severely. They propose a minimum age of criminal responsibility which should be as high as possible in order to protect children from the retributive dimension of criminal law. There is a paradox involved in arguments in favour of raising the age of criminal responsibility, especially if linked with broader arguments to take children’s agency more seriously. Arguments based on children’s restricted cognitive functioning to limit their criminal responsibility are not without the risk to being counter-productive when arguing in favour of the enlargement of other human rights claims for children such as their right to be heard or to participate (Goldson, 2013: 117).

What happens with children under the minimum age of criminal responsibility, who are hence legally deemed not to be able to infringe the penal law, but who in fact do commit offences? In most juvenile justice systems, young people who have committed an offence receive an official reaction to their behaviour, in the form of a protective measure rather than a punishment. But this alternative response, which relies on the image of an incapable child who first and foremost needs to be protected, does not necessarily lead to a better outcome for the child (Van de Kerchove, 1977). Criminal responsibility has not only an instrumental dimension but also a legal protective one that protects the presumed perpetrator of an offence against unwarranted State interference and excessive limitation of a person’s liberty. Is the presumption of innocence, which is a legal guarantee that forms part of the protective dimension of criminal responsibility, also valid in a protectionist juvenile justice system? Furthermore, proscribing children’s criminal responsibility does not resolve questions related to the protection of victims, for example, in the case of crimes committed by child soldiers. How should we see children and young people involved in armed warfare and who commit crimes, ‘as innocent victims of political circumstance who should be protected and forgiven, or as moral agents who should be held responsible for their actions?’ (Rosen, 2007: 304). And how to deal with situations when the perpetrator of a violent crime against children, for whom children’s rights defenders want longer periods of deprivation of liberty, is him or herself a young person, for whom the same advocates ask not to hold him or her criminally responsible? How are justice systems to deal with a child who in legal terms cannot be held responsible, who in other words cannot be recognized legally as exercising agency when committing an offence, but who in practice, by the very act of committing an offence, exercises agency?

In general human rights discourse, the right to marry without discrimination, the right to work in dignity, the right to political activism including taking up arms to resist oppression or to fight for political ideals, as well as the right to be held responsible for one’s wrongdoing including criminal offending, are conceptualized as positive rights. They all refer to ideas about autonomy and agency which occupy a central place in human rights discourse. When it comes to children, these same activities are considered ‘wrong’ and the concept of agency prevalent in human rights discourse loses centre stage. In the field of women’s human rights, Merry (2009) analyses other examples of practices besides child marriage which are considered to so seriously violate human rights that they cannot be freely chosen, such as female genital cutting or prostitution. These forms of behaviour are deemed so hideous that consent is not possible, even if many women who are engaged in these activities assert that it is their own choice, for instance, to turn to sex work. Even if girls under the acceptable age limit choose to marry, according to the current human rights regime, this choice cannot be, per definition, understood as an autonomous choice. In all of these examples, Merry (2009) observes ‘a clash between the imagined autonomous self at the root of the human rights system and a relational self shaped by obligations to kin and community’ (p. 404). In the field of human rights of women, the responsibilized, agentic self in human rights discourse takes precedence over the relational self. In the field of children’s rights advocacy discourse, the denial of children’s right to marry, to work, to participate in violent political struggle or to be held responsible when charged with a criminal offence not only ignores children’s relational selves but also their responsibilized, agentic selves.

In a recently published edited volume which addresses the challenge for childhood studies to reconceptualize children’s agency, the authors argue that the agency of children is to be located in social relations and interdependency (Esser et al., 2016). Agency is not a quality a person possesses or not, but materializes in decentralized practices in which children participate. Children’s rights advocacy discourse points out that there is also a strong normative dimension in the agency concept. When children don’t ‘do the right thing’, their autonomy and agency are no longer subjected to empirical verification but are deemed impossible by definition. Ideological positions on the absence of children’s agency, even if they are motivated by high ideals to protect children against exploitation or manipulation, risk not only leading to new problems in children’s lives but also reveal some of the conceptual weaknesses of the agency concept itself which needs to deal with questions about what is considered ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ in relation to children.